---
title: "4.6 Provide a Premise to Support or Add Support for the Conclusion"
date: 2022-09-25T21:53:01+05:30
description:
menu:
  sidebar:
    name: 4.6 Provide a Premise to Support or Add Support for the Conclusion
    identifier: ttp-cr-4-6
    parent: ttp-cr-4
    weight: 35
hero: 
tags: ["MBA", "GMAT", "TTP", "CR"]
categories: ["GMAT"]
math: true
---
## Lesson Content
In some Strengthen the Argument questions, the passages contain conclusions without any supporting premises.

{{< alert type="warning" >}}
💡<b>MUST KNOW:</b>

In some Strengthen the Argument questions, the passages contain conclusions without any supporting premises. In other questions, the premises within the arguments only partially support the conclusions.
{{< /alert >}}

In any of these cases, an effective way for an answer choice to strengthen the argument is to provide a premise, which will either provide the only support for the conclusion or provide further support for the conclusion alongside existing premises.

{{< alert type="warning" >}}
💡<b>MUST KNOW:</b>

An effective way for an answer choice to strengthen the argument is to provide a premise, which will either provide the only support for the conclusion or provide further support for the conclusion alongside existing premises.
{{< /alert >}}

Remember, it is not necessary for the premise provided by the correct answer to prove that the conclusion is definitely correct; rather the support provided by the answer choice just has to make the conclusion more likely to be true.

{{< alert type="warning" >}}
💡<b>MUST KNOW:</b>

It is not necessary for the premise provided by the correct answer to prove that the conclusion is definitely correct; rather the support provided by the answer choice just has to make the conclusion more likely to be true.
{{< /alert >}}

Consider the following example.

> <em>Breezetricity, a company that specializes in using windmills to generate electrical power, plans to install a large windmill generation facility in the developing country Urdall. Even though it is expected that, for at least the next decade, demand for electricity in Urdall will be exceeded by the generating capacity of three coal fired generating facilities located in Urdall, Breezetricity expects its new windmill generation facility in Urdall to be profitable within five years.</em>

<em>Which of the following, if true, mostly strongly justifies Breezetricity’s contention?</em>

We see that in the passage there is essentially no support for Breezetricity’s contention that the plant will be profitable.

> <em>(<u>Correct Answer</u>)</em> <em>Several international corporations that are interested in building manufacturing plants in Urdall have stated that they will do so only if there is available to them in Urdall a source of pollution free power.</em>

The above statement provides reason to believe that there will be demand for the power generated by Breezetricity’s windmill facility.

{{< alert type="warning" >}}
💡<b>MUST KNOW:</b>

An argument can be strengthened via the addition of a premise that supports the conclusion.
{{< /alert >}}

In the Breezetricity example, the passage contained no premises to support the contention made by Breezetricity.

In the following example, there is a premise that supports the conclusion, but there is still room for more support from a correct answer.

> <em>The government of Khartona has decided to address the high rate of diabetes in Khartona by adding a 20 percent tax to the purchase price of sugary drinks. Since sugary drinks are the source of most of the refined sugar consumed by people in Khartona, the government’s position is that imposing the tax will result in a significant reduction in people’s consumption of refined sugar.</em>

<em>Which of the following, if true, provides the most support for the government’s position?</em>

In the above passage, there is some support for the government’s position.

Consider the following: What if people in Khartona would respond to the tax by reducing their consumption of sugary drinks but would then consume sugar in another way? Wouldn’t that situation be a problem for the plan?

Alternatively, what if sugary drinks were so inexpensive that a 20 percent tax added to the prices of sugary drinks would not have much effect on people’s consumption of such drinks? For example, what if these drinks were 10 cents each? Would people really stop consuming them if their price became 12 cents each?

In other words, although the author provides us with some support for her conclusion, there is still considerable room available for strengthening the argument.

An answer choice that provides more support for the idea that imposing the tax would result in reduced consumption of sugar would provide additional support for the government’s position.

For example:

> <em>(<u>Correct Answer</u>) Most people in Khartona who drink sugary drinks choose them instead of healthier drinks that contain less sugar simply because the sugary drinks are 15 percent less expensive than the healthier ones.</em>

Notice how the above answer choice adds new information that makes the government’s position much more convincing.

Another correct answer could be:

> <em>(<u>Correct Answer</u>) If a 20 percent tax were added to the price of sugary drinks, people in Khartona would not begin consuming similar amounts of sugar via consuming candy and sweet desserts.</em>

Notice how this answer choice also adds new information that makes the government’s position much more convincing.

Consider the following example.

{{< quizdown >}}

---
primary_color: green
secondary_color: lightgray
text_color: black
shuffle_questions: false
shuffle_answers: false
---

##  Example 3 

The board of Centerville Hospital has decided to implement an extensive quality improvement program in order to reduce the number of medical mistakes that occur each year at the hospital.

Which of the following, if true, provides the most support for the consultants’ claim?

1. [ ] (A) The amount that Centerville Hospital spends annually on employee compensation has been decreasing over the past several years.
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (E)
2. [ ] (B) The consultants were hired by the board of Centerville Hospital to find ways for the hospital to reduce costs.
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (E)
3. [ ] (C) The annual operating expenses of Centerville Hospital are greater than those of any other hospital in the same county.
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (E)
4. [ ] (D) Some of the employees of Centerville Hospital are paid less than some employees in similar positions in other hospitals.
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (E)
5. [x] (E) Often, when medical mistakes occur, patients harmed because of them use legal means to obtain significant monetary compensation from those considered responsible for the mistakes.

{{< /quizdown >}}

   <h5><details><summary><b><u>View Solution</u></b></summary>
   {{< alert type="secondary" >}}

##### Question Level: easy



The consultants’ claim is:


<u>Conclusion</u>: As a result of implementing the program, the hospital’s total annual costs will decrease.


Notice that, while the passage provides some background information related to the consultants’ claim, it does not include any evidence that supports the claim. So, to strengthen the argument, we need an answer that is a premise that supports the consultants’ claim.


> <b>(A) The amount that Centerville Hospital spends annually on employee compensation has been decreasing over the past several years.
</b>


 We have to be careful not to misconstrue the fact stated by this choice, that the amount that the hospital spends annually on employee compensation has been decreasing, as somehow supporting the conclusion that the hospital’s total annual costs will decrease as a result of implementing the program.


Notice that the passage states as fact that implementing the program will require increasing the amount that the hospital spends on employee compensation, and what this choice says does not change that fact.


> <b>(B) The consultants were hired by the board of Centerville Hospital to find ways for the hospital to reduce costs.
</b>


 The fact that the consultants were hired to reduce costs is not strong evidence that following a recommendation that they have made will actually result in a decrease in costs.


> <b>(C) The annual operating expenses of Centerville Hospital are greater than those of any other hospital in the same county.
</b>


 This comparison does not affect the conclusion. One might take what this choice says as evidence that there is a lot of room for reduction of Centerville Hospital’s expenses and, thus, decide that this choice strengthens the conclusion that implementing the program will result in a reduction of those expenses.


However, that line of reasoning is a stretch, in multiple ways. For one thing, it could be that the reason Centerville Hospital’s expenses are the greatest is simply that it is the biggest hospital.


> <b>(D) Some of the employees of Centerville Hospital are paid less than some employees in similar positions in other hospitals.
</b>


 Regardless of how much Centerville Hospital employees are paid, an increase in the amount that the hospital spends on employee compensation will result in an increase rather than a decrease in annual total costs.


> <span class="correct-answer"><i class="fal fa-check-circle"></i><span class="ms-1 fw-semibold correctness-text">YOUR CHOICE</span></span><b>(E) Often, when medical mistakes occur, patients harmed because of them use legal means to obtain significant monetary compensation from those considered responsible for the mistakes.
</b>


 This choice is a premise that supports the consultants’ claim.


If patients harmed because of medical mistakes often use legal means to obtain significant monetary compensation from those considered responsible for the mistakes, then mistakes made at Centerville Hospital could be costly for the hospital. Thus, reducing the number of medical mistakes made at Centerville Hospital could result in a significant reduction in the hospital’s annual expenses.


> ##### Correct Answer: (E)

{{< /alert >}}
</details></h5>


Let’s next discuss how we can strengthen an argument by explicitly stating an assumption upon which the argument depends.

