---
title: "7.6.2 Answers that are Fully Supported by Small Portions of the Passages"
date: 2022-07-27T21:53:01+05:30
description:
menu:
  sidebar:
    name: 7.6.2 Answers that are Fully Supported by Small Portions of the Passages
    identifier: ttp-cr-7-6-2
    parent: ttp-cr-7-6
    weight: 70
hero: 
tags: ["MBA", "GMAT", "TTP", "CR"]
categories: ["GMAT"]
math: true
---
## Lesson Content
Another type of correct answer that often appears in Inference questions is an answer that is fully supported by a small portion of the stimulus.

{{< alert type="warning" >}}
💡<b>MUST KNOW:</b>

In some cases, the correct answers to Inference questions are fully supported by small portions of or even single sentences of the passages. Understand that a correct answer to an Inference question need not be supported by the entire stimulus and that an answer will be correct as long as some portion of the stimulus fully supports the answer.
{{< /alert >}}

Consider the following example:

> <em>Ever since the first solar power generation facility was installed in Utrandia, people have been anticipating a day when the air in the nation would be cleaner. Since the primary culprit in creating air pollution is the burning of coal, having cleaner air requires that coal fired plants be replaced by solar generation facilities. In the past year the amount of electricity generated by solar panels in Utrandia exceeded for the first time the amount generated via burning coal.</em>

> <em>Which of the following is information provided by the passage?</em>

> <em>(<u>Trap Choice</u>) The air in Utrandia is now cleaner, because most coal fired plants in the nation have been shut down and replaced with solar generation facilities.</em>

> <em>(<u>Correct Answer</u>) Two years ago, in Utrandia, the amount of electricity generated via the burning of coal was greater than or equal to the amount generated by solar panels.</em>

In this case, the support for the correct answer comes entirely from one sentence out of the three sentences in the passage.

The trap choice may appear to be a true statement supported by information synthesized from the passage in its entirety, but it isn’t really.

In order to make sure that we identify the correct answer when it is supported by only a small portion of the passage, and don’t get tricked into picking an incorrect choice, we must keep our mind open to the idea that the correct answer could be something quite different from what we expect, and we have to make sure that we don’t choose an incorrect choice just because it resembles what we expected to see.

It could be that only after we have eliminated some answer choices that we know can’t be correct will it start to become apparent to us that the correct answer can’t be one that is supported by the entirety of the passage.

Consider the following example:

{{< quizdown >}}

---
primary_color: green
secondary_color: lightgray
text_color: black
shuffle_questions: false
shuffle_answers: false
---

##  Example 15 

Many doctors simply prescribe blood pressure medication to any patient whose blood pressure exceeds a certain level and do little to help such patients learn to use natural methods to reduce their blood pressure.

If the statements above are true, which of the following conclusions can be properly drawn?

1. [ ] (A) Natural methods for reducing blood pressure are as effective as blood pressure medications prescribed by doctors.
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (C)
2. [ ] (B) It is more likely that people’s blood pressure will be reduced via natural methods in cases in which the people’s blood pressure is dangerously high.
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (C)
3. [x] (C) There are natural methods that are effective in reducing the blood pressure of at least some people.
4. [ ] (D) All people who have been prescribed blood pressure medication should reduce body weight, reduce sodium intake, and meditate to lower blood pressure to a safe levels.
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (C)
5. [ ] (E) Many doctors would not prefer that patients working with them seek to reduce blood pressure via using natural methods rather than continue to use blood pressure medication.
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (C)

{{< /quizdown >}}

   <h5><details><summary><b><u>View Solution</u></b></summary>
   {{< alert type="secondary" >}}

##### Question Level: easy



A test-taker might expect the correct answer to this question to be the result of synthesizing into a single conclusion all of the information about methods for reducing blood pressure that is given in the statements in the passage. However, it is also possible that the correct answer is based entirely on information found in just one of the sentences that make up the passage.


> <b>(A) Natural methods for reducing blood pressure are as effective as blood pressure medications prescribed by doctors.
</b>


 While, in saying that many people have succeeded in using natural methods to reduce blood pressure, the passage indicates that natural methods can be effective, the passage does not provide information comparing the effectiveness of natural methods with that of medication. Therefore, while what this choice says may be true, it goes beyond what is supported by the passage.


> <b>(B) It is more likely that people’s blood pressure will be reduced via natural methods in cases in which the people’s blood pressure is dangerously high.
</b>


 This choice takes what the passage says about people with dangerously high blood pressure and distorts it. The passage uses the examples of people with dangerously high blood pressure reducing their blood pressure through the use of natural methods to make a point about the effectiveness of natural methods. However, the passage does not indicate that the reason for choosing to discuss people with dangerously high blood pressure rather than people with somewhat overly high blood pressure is that it is most likely that people’s blood pressure will be reduced via natural methods in cases in which the people’s blood pressure is dangerously high. For all we know from what the passage says, people who have dangerously high blood pressure are those least likely to succeed in reducing their blood pressure.


> <span class="correct-answer"><i class="fal fa-check-circle"></i><span class="ms-1 fw-semibold correctness-text">YOUR CHOICE</span></span><b>(C) There are natural methods that are effective in reducing the blood pressure of at least some people.
</b>


 The second sentence of the passage fully supports what this answer choice says, and the other sentence does not contribute any support to what this answer choice says. If, as the second sentence says, many people have succeeded in reducing their blood pressure levels by using natural methods, then it must be true that there are natural methods that are effective in reducing the blood pressure levels of at least some people.


> <b>(D) All people who have been prescribed blood pressure medication should reduce body weight, reduce sodium intake, and meditate to lower blood pressure to a safe levels.
</b>


This choice could be tempting because it includes elements from all three sentences of the passage, and, therefore, it could seem to be a conclusion fully supported by what the three sentences convey. However, although the passage mentions that taking one or more of the actions listed in this choice can result in a reduction in blood pressure, the passage does not fully support the idea that all people who have been prescribed blood pressure medication should take all of these actions. For one thing, for all we know, some people who have been prescribed blood pressure medication would be hurt by taking all of these actions, and the passage does not give us reason to believe otherwise.


> <b>(E) Many doctors would not prefer that patients working with them seek to reduce blood pressure via using natural methods rather than continue to use blood pressure medication.
</b>


 While the passage mentions what many doctors do, it does not say anything that clearly indicates what doctors <em>prefer </em>that patients do.


> ##### Correct Answer: (C)

{{< /alert >}}
</details></h5>


Let’s now look at how numbers can be used in Inference questions.

