---
title: "7.9.3 Clauses in a Sentence Do Not Have to Be Structured in the Same Way to Be Parallel."
date: 2022-12-26T21:53:01+05:30
description:
menu:
  sidebar:
    name: 7.9.3 Clauses in a Sentence Do Not Have to Be Structured in the Same Way to Be Parallel.
    identifier: ttp-sc-7-9-3
    parent: ttp-sc-7-9
    weight: 145
hero: 
tags: ["MBA", "GMAT", "TTP", "SC"]
categories: ["GMAT"]
math: true
---
## Lesson Content
When considering parallelism of clauses in a sentence, there is one simple rule that we can follow:

Clauses in a sentence do not have to be structured in the same way to be parallel.

After all, clauses are parallel to each other in that they all have subjects and verbs.

{{< alert type="warning" >}}
💡<b>MUST KNOW:</b>

Clauses in a sentence do not have to be structured in the same way to be parallel because clauses are parallel to each other in that they all have subjects and verbs.
{{< /alert >}}

Consider the following sentence:

> Glass is relatively hard, diamond is harder than glass, and lonsdaleite is the hardest naturally occurring substance known.

Notice that the three clauses in the sentence are parallel.

Consider the following slightly different sentence:

> Glass is relatively hard, diamond is harder than glass, and the hardest naturally occurring substance known is lonsdaleite.

Notice that, while the three clauses are not laid out in the same way, they are still parallel, and the sentence is perfectly acceptable.

Consider the following two sentence versions:

> While many people like traveling, many others prefer taking “staycations.”

> While many people like traveling, taking “staycations” is preferred by many others.

We might say that the first sentence looks more parallel.

How do we use this knowledge to score points on test day? When we encounter sentences versions composed of multiple clauses, remember that clauses are, by definition, parallel to each other.

Let’s consider some Sentence Correction examples.

{{< quizdown >}}

---
primary_color: green
secondary_color: lightgray
text_color: black
shuffle_questions: false
shuffle_answers: false
---

##  Sentence Correction Example 25  

Twenty percent of the teachers report that the new curriculum is working no better than the previous one, <u>more than half report noticeable benefits generated by the change, and the change has not affected the remaining about thirty percent of the teachers</u>.

1. [x] (A) more than half report noticeable benefits generated by the change, and the change has not affected the remaining about thirty percent of the teachers
2. [ ] (B) more than half reports that the change has generated noticeable benefits and that the change has not affected the remaining about thirty percent of them
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (A)
3. [ ] (C) the report by more than half is that the change has generated multiple benefits, the change not affecting the remaining about thirty percent of the teachers
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (A)
4. [ ] (D) more than half report that changing generates noticeable benefits, with the remaining about thirty percent of them not affected by the change
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (A)
5. [ ] (E) more than half reports that, by changing, noticeable benefits have been generated, and the remaining about thirty percent have not been affected by the change
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (A)

{{< /quizdown >}}

   <h5><details><summary><b><u>View Solution</u></b></summary>
   {{< alert type="secondary" >}}

##### Question Level: medium



In most versions, the sentence is composed of three clauses. Arriving at the correct answer requires realizing that those three clauses don’t have to be structured in the same way for the sentence to be correct.


Because the clauses in the correct version are not all structured in the same way, the correct answer may seem incorrect. All the same, careful analysis of all the versions reveals that the correct version is the only one that is logical.


> <span class="correct-answer"><i class="fal fa-check-circle"></i><span class="ms-1 fw-semibold correctness-text">CORRECT ANSWER</span></span><b>(A)</b> Twenty percent of the teachers report that the new curriculum is working no better than the previous one, <b>more than half report noticeable benefits generated by the change, and the change has not affected the remaining about thirty percent of the teachers
</b>.



 The first two clauses in this version begin with quantities, “twenty percent” and “more than half,” while the third clause begins with “the change” and ends with a quantity, “about thirty percent of the teachers.” Also, the first clause includes “report that,” while, in the second clause, “report” is not followed by “that. For these reasons, this version may seem a little off at first.


However, the three independent clauses that make up this version are basically parallel, even though they are not structured in exactly the same way, and since this version is grammatically correct and conveys a logical meaning, this version is correct.


> <b>(B)</b> Twenty percent of the teachers report that the new curriculum is working no better than the previous one, <b>more than half reports that the change has generated noticeable benefits and that the change has not affected the remaining about thirty percent of them
</b>.



Since “more than half” means “more than half of the teachers,” “more than half” needs a plural verb. So, the singular “reports” is not correct.


Also, because of the presence of “that” after “and,” the list in this version is not logically structured as we can see by summarizing it:


Twenty percent … report that …, more than half reports that … and that ….


We can see the sentence is composed of two independent clauses “twenty percent … report that” and “more than half reports that … and that” joined by a comma without a conjunction. The clause that appears after “and,” “that the change has not affected …,” is not an independent clause. It’s a noun clause that is a direct object of “reports,” in “more than half reports that the change has generated … and that the change has not affected ….”


Even though careful analysis reveals this choice to be clearly flawed, this choice could be tempting, because the repetition of the structure “that the change has” makes the choice look parallel. We have to be careful not to be tempted into choosing a choice like this one just because it has a parallel look to it.


> <b>(C)</b> Twenty percent of the teachers report that the new curriculum is working no better than the previous one, <b>the report by more than half is that the change has generated multiple benefits, the change not affecting the remaining about thirty percent of the teachers
</b>.



The wording “the report by more than half is that the change has generated multiple benefits” does not make sense. It conveys the illogical meaning that there is some report “by more than half” of the teachers, and that that “report” is “that the change has generated multiple benefits.”


Also, because this version ends with an absolute phrase, “the change not affecting …,” rather than with a third clause connected to the first two clauses by a comma + “and,” this version is incorrectly composed of two clauses, “twenty percent of the teachers report” and “the report by more than half is …,” joined by a comma without a conjunction.


> <b>(D)</b> Twenty percent of the teachers report that the new curriculum is working no better than the previous one, <b>more than half report that changing generates noticeable benefits, with the remaining about thirty percent of them not affected by the change
</b>.



The wording of this choice, “more than half report that changing generates noticeable benefits,” does not convey a meaning that is clearly connected to the rest of what the sentence says. It seems to convey that the teachers report that changing in general, rather than the previously mentioned change of curriculum, somehow generates benefits, and leaves the reader wondering, “Changing what?”


Also, because this version ends with a modifying phrase, “with the remaining about thirty percent of them …,” rather than with a third clause connected to the first two clauses by a comma + “and,” this version is incorrectly composed of two clauses, “twenty percent of the teachers report …” and “more than half report,” joined by a comma without a conjunction.


> <b>(E)</b> Twenty percent of the teachers report that the new curriculum is working no better than the previous one, <b>more than half reports that, by changing, noticeable benefits have been generated, and the remaining about thirty percent have not been affected by the change
</b>.



Since “more than half” means “more than half of the teachers,” “more than half” needs a plural verb. So, the singular “reports” is not correct.


Also, “by changing, noticeable benefits have been generated” conveys the nonsensical meaning that, by changing, the benefits have caused themselves to be generated.


We have to be careful not to be tempted into choosing an incorrect choice like this one simply because we see that the choice’s structure is clearly parallel.


> ##### Correct Answer: (A)

{{< /alert >}}
</details></h5>


{{< quizdown >}}

---
primary_color: green
secondary_color: lightgray
text_color: black
shuffle_questions: false
shuffle_answers: false
---

##  Sentence Correction Example 26  

Most frogs and toads live for less than 10 years, many salamanders can live for up to 20 years, and <u>an amphibian’s longest lifespan, the olm salamander, is more than 100 years</u>.

1. [ ] (A) an amphibian’s longest lifespan, the olm salamander, is more than 100 years
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (E)
2. [ ] (B) the olm salamander can live for more than 100 years, being the longest lifespan of an amphibian
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (E)
3. [ ] (C) an amphibian’s longest lifespan is more than 100 years, which is the olm salamander
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (E)
4. [ ] (D) the olm salamander can live for more than 100 years, which is the amphibian that lives the longest
    > <br> <b>Correct Answer:</b> (E)
5. [x] (E) the longest lifespan of an amphibian is that of the olm salamander, which can live for more than 100 years

{{< /quizdown >}}

   <h5><details><summary><b><u>View Solution</u></b></summary>
   {{< alert type="secondary" >}}

##### Question Level: medium



> <b>(A)</b> Most frogs and toads live for less than 10 years, many salamanders can live for up to 20 years, and <b>an amphibian’s longest lifespan, the olm salamander, is more than 100 years
</b>.



 Although the three clauses in this version are parallel, in this version, “an amphibian’s longest lifespan, the olm salamander” conveys the ridiculous meaning that a lifespan is a salamander. After all, “an amphibian,” the logical target of the appositive “the olm salamander,” appears only as a possessive modifying the noun “longest lifespan.” Thus, the appositive “the olm salamander” incorrectly calls the lifespan, rather than the amphibian, a salamander.


> <b>(B)</b> Most frogs and toads live for less than 10 years, many salamanders can live for up to 20 years, and <b>the olm salamander can live for more than 100 years, being the longest lifespan of an amphibian
</b>.



 Although the three clauses in this version are parallel, this version is incorrect because it has a meaning issue. The closing participial phrase “being the longest lifespan” takes the subject of the preceding clause, “the olm salamander,” as the agent of “being.” Thus, this version conveys the nonsensical meaning that “the olm salamander” is “being the longest lifespan.”


> <b>(C)</b> Most frogs and toads live for less than 10 years, many salamanders can live for up to 20 years, and <b>an amphibian’s longest lifespan is more than 100 years, which is the olm salamander
</b>.



Although the three clauses that make up the list in this version are parallel, the closing relative clause, “which is the olm salamander,” is misplaced, seemingly modifying the noun that directly precedes it, “100 years.” Of course, “100 years” cannot possibly be a salamander, so the meaning conveyed is nonsensical.


> <b>(D)</b> Most frogs and toads live for less than 10 years, many salamanders can live for up to 20 years, and <b>the olm salamander can live for more than 100 years, which is the amphibian that lives the longest
</b>.



Although the three clauses that make up the list in this version are parallel, the closing relative clause, “which is the amphibian that lives the longest,” is too far removed from the noun it logically should modify, “the olm salamander,” to properly refer to it. Instead, the relative clause seems to modify the noun that directly precedes it, “100 years,” conveying the nonsensical meaning that “100 years” is an amphibian.


> <span class="correct-answer"><i class="fal fa-check-circle"></i><span class="ms-1 fw-semibold correctness-text">CORRECT ANSWER</span></span><b>(E)</b> Most frogs and toads live for less than 10 years, many salamanders can live for up to 20 years, and <b>the longest lifespan of an amphibian is that of the olm salamander, which can live for more than 100 years
</b>.



Remember that clauses in a sentence do not have to be structured in the same way to be parallel. Although the final clause in the list of three clauses that appears in this version, “the longest lifespan of an amphibian is that of the olm salamander” is structured somewhat differently from the first two clauses, “most frogs and toads live …” and “many salamanders can live …,” notice that all three are independent clauses that begin with a subject + verb. In fact, there is nothing about the final clause that makes it not parallel to the first two.


The sentence is parallel and grammatically correct and conveys a logical meaning.


> ##### Correct Answer: (E)

{{< /alert >}}
</details></h5>


